---
title: To Want To
date: 2015-05-27 10:35:45 -04:00
permalink: to-want-to
categories:
tags:
- Lesson 11
- Japanese
- Genki
- Grammar
id: 58
updated: '2015-05-27 14:55:15'
---

Let's break down each grammar point from here on into it's own post, written in my own words, rather than simply doing the work.

I found that while recapping the previous lessons, that describing things myself greatly helped me to cement the knowledge. Therefore, I think it's beneficial.

The first grammar point of Lesson 11 is the `たい` form of verbs. This form indicates the desire to perform the verb. This ending is placed on the end of the verb stem.

> `食べたい` -> `to want to eat`

> `飲みたい` -> `to want to drink`

Sentences composition slightly changes when using `たい`. The direct object of the verb can take either an `を` or `が` in this case. Any other particles than `を` do not change.

###### Further Conjugation

A verb stem + `たい` conjugates from this point forward as an `い-adjective`.

> `食べたくない` -> `to not want to eat`

> `食べたかった` -> `to have wanted to eat`

> `食べたくなかった` -> `to have not wanted to eat`

If your wish is one that you've held for a period of time, then you'd use `たいと思っています` instead of simply `たい`, to indicate that it's a wish you've been thinking about.

###### Others

You would not use a `たい` form to describe what others want. Somebody else's wishes would be described as a quotation or a thought. When quoting someone, you would simply end with the `たい` form, followed by the quote marker `と言っていました`.

If describing someone else's wants as in your observations, you would use a special verb `たがる`, which is a combination of `たい` and `がる` which means `to show feelings of being`. Together, it's a verb that means `looks like they want to`.

> `ランドムさんは別個で下らないおもちゃを買いたがっている` -> `Random seems to want to buy another stupid toy.`
