---
title: Yes, We Can!
date: 2015-06-16 16:42:54 -04:00
permalink: yes-we-can
categories:
tags:
- Japanese
- Genki
- Grammar
- Lesson 13
id: 83
updated: '2015-06-16 21:43:05'
---

We can use a verb form called the `Potential` to indicate that a subject is able to perform the verb, or that they can, or is possible.

> I *can* eat.

> I *am able to* drink.

In English, this is performed with an auxiliary verb. In Japanese, this is done with a conjugation.

###### る-verbs

The conjugation of the potential for the `る-verb` is done by replacing the `る` with the ending `られる`, which is a massive clusterfuck to say, especially for idiot gaijin like myself who can't pop the r sounds.

> `食べられる` To be able to eat.

As a side note, for casual slang, you can omit the `ら`
 and simply use `れる` which matches the coming conjugations...

###### う-verbs

The conjugation of the potential for the `う-verb` is done by shifting the final character into the `え` column, and appending `る`.

> `行ける` To be able to go.

> `話せる` To be able to speak.

> `買える` To be able to buy.

> `泳げる` To be able to swim.

> `遊べる` To be able to play.

###### Irregular Verb

As always, certain verbs have exceptions.

> `来られる` To be able to come.

> `できる` To be able to do.

`する` is definitely the most strange, as it changes to another verb entirely. `できる` is a verb that simply means `to be able to do`.

###### Conjugation

Potential forms conjugate further as a regular `る-verb.`

> `話す` `話せる` `話せます` `話せません`

> `見る` `見られる` `見られます` `見られません`

###### Corresponding Particles

Verbs that take the particle `を` can take either `を` or `が` when made into a potential. できる is again special in that it almost always takes `が`.

All other particles remain the same when turned into a potential.

> `その単語がわかれる。` I can understand that word.

> `仕事ができる。` I can work.

> `家に入れる。` I can enter my house.
